#Topics covered: Networking technologies, Communications protocols, telecommunications technologies, network topologies and subnetting

Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model and the TCP/IP architecture.

#Communications Models

We access systems through their address. The problem is that each system will have multiple address. These addresses are best separated into buckets
related to the functionality provided by the protocol each address belongs to.

##Protocols

A protocol is a set of rules or conventions that dictate communication.

##OSI

It includes seven layers. Messages start being created from the Application layer down.

- Application (layer 7): The application layer is the one closest to the end user. This does not mean that it is the application itself, however.
Application layer protocols manage the communication needs of the application. They may identify resources and manage interacting with those
resources. As an example, the HTTP is an application layer protocol. It takes care of negotiating for resources btw client and the server.
- Presentation (layer 6): It's responsible for preparing data for the application layer. It makes sure that the data that is handed up to the
application is in the rght format so it can be consumed.
- Session (layer 5): It manages the communication btw the endpoints when it comes to maintaining the communication of the applications (client and
server). Remote procedure calls (RPCs) are an example of a function at the session layer. There are components of file sharing that also live at
the session layer, since negotiation of communication btw the endpoints needs to take place. It takes care of making sure that files are succesfully
transmitted and complete.
- Transport (layer 4): It takes care of segmenting messages for transmission. It also takes care of multiplexing of the communication. Both the TCP
and the UDP are transport protocols. These protocols use ports for addressing, so receiving systems know which application to pass the traffic to.
- Network (layer 3): It gets message from one endpoint to another. It does this by taking care of addressing and routing. IP is one protocol that
operates at this layer.
- Data Link (layer 2): One other address to contend with is the media access control (MAC) address. This is layer 2 address, identifying the
network interface on the network so communications can get from one system to another on the local network. The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP),
virtual local area networks (VLANs), Ethernet and Frame Relay are Data Link layer protocols. They take care of formatting the data to be sent out on
the transmission medium.
- Physical (layer 1): This is all the protocols that manage the physical communications. 10BaseT, 10Base2, 100BaseTX and 1000BseT are examples of
physical layer protocols. They dictate how the pulses on the wire are handled.

One of the problems with the OSI model is that there are not always good fit when it comes to mapping protocols to the seven layers. The problem
often comes in the areas btw the Session and Application layers. As an example, at which layer does does the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol live?
Is it the Session layer because it ultimately manages sessions, or is it the Presentation layer because it includes encryption mechanisms and
negotiates them? Other protocols seem to exist btw layers. ARP, for instance, is said to to operate at the Data Link layer, but it needs to know
about the network layer because it provides the bridge btw the addressing in those two layers.

However, there are places where having the model makes conceptualizing things much easier.

##TCP/IP Architecture

The way the suite of protocols used within the TCP/IP stack is described is slightly different from the way the OSI model is described. After TCP/IP
was implemented, the conceptual design of protocols was described. For this reason, the suite is sometimes referred to as model, but it may also
be referred to as an architecture, since it's a description of an as-built design rather than something conceptual. OSI is entirely conceptual since
it doesn't describe anything in particular.

The TCP/IP architecture is a much simpler design than the OSI model, which is an immediate difference and a reflection of the as-built nature of the
design as compared with the conceptual design of the OSI.

#Topologies

Some topologies are only found in certain situations. Some will be found in service provider networks, while others are more commonly found in local
area networks.

Even in cases where I'm working with virtual networks, I will find these conceptual ways of thinking about how systems are interconnected helpful. In
the end, whether I'm connecting virtual machines or containers or physical systems or some collections of all of those, I'll be working with one of
these topology models. The topology tells me how traffic flows from one system to another and what intermediary devices the communication passes
through, which will help me determine where I may be able to intercept or manipulate traffic.

##Bus Network

It consists of a single network cable to which every device on the network connects. A bus is a communication channel. There is no mediating device,
all of the computers are connected directly to one another by means of that single network cable.

##Star Network

The difference btw the bus and the star network is that there is a mediating device btw all the devices. This may be a hub, which is a repeater, or
may be a switch, which the signal will be sent to the correct port. And this is where the different layers are helpful. A switch, which is the most
common device in a star network topology, acts at layer 2 of the OSI model. It uses the MAC address to make decisions about where traffic goes.
In the case of a star network with a hub, there are the same issues as there would be with a bus network -- lots of collisions where messages sent
out on the wire run over other messages sent by someone else. A switch alleviates those issues because only traffic addressed to a system gets
sent to that system.

##Ring Network

A ring network is similar to a bus network in the sense that all of the nodes on the network appear to be connected on a contiguous network segment.
Only the system that has the token gets to talk.

##Mesh Network

If a system in a mesh network fails, there is probably another pathway to get btw one system and another. While I can connect systems together in
multiple ways in a mesh network, in spite of the orderliness that the circular design of the network shows, a couple of failures can potentially
isolate nodes in a mesh network. The way around that is to add connections. The more pathways to get from one system to another, the less chance
failure will be catastrophic, meaning communication doesn't happen. The problem with adding more connections is the resulting complexity.

##Hybrid

There are circumstances where blending multiple network topologies is the right way to go about connecting my network. One common hybrid approach
is the star-bus. If I have switches capable of 64 network connections but I have 200 users that I need to connect to my local network, I would need
to effectively add a bus into my network topology. The bus would connect all of my switches together and become a backbone for my network. Then from
each switch, I have the traditional star where all the connections come back to the switch they are connected to.

Hybrid networks are most common in the physical world where we are bound by physical networking equipment and cables.

#Physical Networking

At some point, I need to connect to the network. There are multiple components to that interaction. I need a network interface on my end. I need a
medium that is going to carry the communication. I need to have something on the other end of the communication. Because I'm not likely going to be
working at service providers or telecommunications providers as I'm doing security testing, I'm not going to worry about protocols like Frame Relay,
Asynchronous Transfer Mode or Fiber Distributed Data Interface. The protocol I will almost exclusively run across when I am talking about physical
networking is Ethernet.   

Each layer of the network stack has a different term to refer to the chunck of data encapsulated by that layer. These chunks are called protocol data
units (PDUs). The PDU at layer 2 is a frame.

##Addresing

Ethernet interfaces all have addresses. These addresses are exclusively to each network interface, and they are called MAC addresses. Because the MAC
address is hard-coded into the hardware of the interface, it is sometimes referred to as the hadware address. Since it's also the address that is used
by a physical piece of hardware, it is sometimes referred to as physical address.

The common format of a MAC address is 6 octets (8-bit bytes) separated by colons, BA:00:4C:78:57:00. The address is broken into two parts. The first
is the organizationally unique identifier (OUI). This is also called the vendor ID. The second half of the MAC address is the unique address within
the vendor ID of that interface. So, half is for the vendor, and half is ofr the card itself.

###MAC Addresses

The MAC address is represented in hexadecimal values because it's a common way to represent octets. A pair of hexadecimal values covers the range of
potential values of a byte -- 00 is 0 and ff is 255.

The MAC address is used exclusively on my local network. Any system that wants to send me anything will address it to my MAC address. I can also send
messages to every device on the network by using the broadcast address. The broadcast MAC address is ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff. My network interface knows
what address it has, because it's in the hardware. What this means, though, is that traffic that is in some way addressed to the interface, either
directly to its address or to the broadcast address

###Switching

MAC addresses are the cornerstone for switching. Switching is what happens when decisions about forwarding messages are made based on the physical
address. A switch is realy a multport bridge. A bridge is a device that connects two networks together, passing traffic btw them based on the
destination MAC address. Local traffic stays on one side of the bridge; traffic destined for the other side gets passed over. This does, though,
mean that the switch needs to know what MAC address lives at which port. It does this by waiting until a message comes in on each port and notices the
source address.

Because having to perform a lookup of which port to forward a message takes time, which will slow down message transmission, it's essential that the
lookup be as fast as possible. This is generally accomplished through the use of something called content-addressable memory (CAM). This means that to
look up a value, I search for it based on another value. It's easier to look up a port value by just indexing to the MAC address.

What a switch does, which is the value of switching, is make determinations about what traffic goes to which port based on the destination MAC
address. When performing security testing, acting like an attacker, it's more convenient to be able to see more traffic than that.

There are some ways around that challenge. One of them, if I have some control over the switch, is to tell the switch to mirror traffic on one port to
another port. Then, I need to have the system I'm running attacks from attached to the mirror port. Another way is to fool the switch into sending
traffic to me.

##IP

Moving into the Network layer, I run across IP. As each layer is passed through, a set of data is added to the message that is specific to the
protocol processing the message. These sets of data are called headers. Each protocol has its own set of headers that get attached. The message is
then encapsulated by the headers, creating an entirely new PDU. For IP, the PDU is called a packet.

###Headers

###Octets vs Bytes

###Addressing

IPv4 addresses are 4 octets long. Since each value is 8 bits, there are potential values of 0 to 255. Not all values, especially in the
first two octets, are used, however. There are some addresses that are held in reserve for various reasons. For a start, the address range
127.0.0.0 - 127.255.255.255 is reserved for loopback addresses. These are addresses that refer to the host they are assigned to. The loopback
interface ensures there is always a network interface on the system and allows for testing over a network without sending any traffic outside the
system. Commonly, the loopback address on systems is 127.0.0.1, though any address in that range could be used.

There are IP address that are used for private networks. By convetion, these address are not routable over the Internet. Most networks will do
something to block source addresses from these ranges coming into their space, since they should never be originating from the outside of a network.
The ranges for these private addresses meant to be used by any network that doesn't have public IP address, are:
10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255, 172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255 and 192.168.0.0 - 192.168.255.255.

Additionally, other address ranges are held in reserve. The range 224.0.0.0 trough 239.255.255.255 is used for multicast messages. Anything above
240.0.0.0 is also reserved and is not currently in use.

Instead of just 4 octets that are used in IPv4 IPv6 uses 16 bytes. Because an octet can be represented with two hexadecimal digits, I'll see IPv6
addresses represented in that way. There are 16 octets in an IPv6 address, the longer address I'll run across will be 32 characters.

IPv6 has three different address types. The first is unicastm which refers to a single system. Anycast addresses are groups of systems that share a
single address. A message sent to the anycast address will be delivered to just one of the hosts in the anycast group. This is commonly be the
closest address, based on routing rules. Any anycast address will have the same format as a unicast address. Multicast addresses will look like the
other addresses, but they are formatted based on the fact that they are muticast and on the application that is using the address. 
multicast 

###Subnets

I may need to know what addresses belong to my target based on a subnet. IP addresses are aggregated into networks using contiguous addresses. A part
of the IP address belongs to the host and a part belongs to the network. This segmentation of the addresses also helps systems to know what addresses
are local, meaning the communications stay on the local network. The way systems are told what are local networks and what are not local networks is
that a subnet mask is paired with the IP address.

To determine what portion of an IP address belongs to the network, I look at the bits that are set to 1 in the subnet mask. To better understand
this concept, let's take a look at a binary representation of a subnet mask:
11111111.11111111.11111111.10000000

Any bit position that has a 1 in its part of the network segment. Subnet masks can only have certain values: 0, 128, 192, 224, 240, 248, 252, 254 and
255. If apply binary to decimal translation to the binary adress above, I can see the subnet mask is 255.255.255.128. This means that only the last
7 bits of the last octet are used for host values. The bit representation in the last octet would be 10000000. This is where I need to start applying
the IP address to the subnet mask to get the address range.

With a subnet mask of 255.255.255.128, I have the possibilities of two address blocks, regardless of what the IP address is. I can vary the last
octet, and I am constrained because I can't change the value in the MSBP. This leaves me with the ranges of 0-127 and 128-255. Once I know what my
IP address is, I know which block I am in. Let's say my IP address is 172.20.30.42, and my netmask is 255.255.255.128. I know my address block has to
be 172.20.30.0-127 because that's the range that .42 lands in.

Another way of designating network blocks is using Classless Intern-Domain Routing (CIDR) notation. This means that rather than indicating a subnet
mask, I only get the number of prefix bits. The prefix tells me which bits are being used for the network. The subnet mask used above translates to
/25, and I would indicate the subnet with the IP address by indicating 172.20.30.42/25. 

If I want to know how many addresses belong to a particular network block, I have the CIDR notation. Often, I'll see CIDR notation hovering around the
/24 area, which is a 255.255.255.0 subnet mask and is common. If I want to know how many hosts, I just divide by 2 or multiply by 2 for every bit
change in the prefix. A network that is /24 has 256 possible values in the host portion (the last octet). If I go to /25, that means I get 128
possible values. If I go to the other direction to a /23, I double because a lost a prefix bit, so I got 512 possible values in the host portion. If
the first octet is used for the network designation and all others are used the host values, I would have all the bit positions in the first byte
filled up, which means I'm using 8 bits, leaving me with a CIDR designation of /8. Similarly, if I use the first two octets, I'm using 16 bits, so I
have a /16.

One note about subnets, though, is that there are two values that can't be used for systems. The lowest possible address in any network segment is
used for the broadcast address. In a common /24 network, the .0 becomes the network address, and the .255 is used for the broadcast. Neither of
these can be alocated for hosts.  

IPv6 makes the whole process even easier. No subnet masks are used any longer when indicating a network address. Instead, CIDR designation is used
exclusively to indicate which part is network and which is host. The same rules apply. The network portion always starts from the left. A /50
network means that the first 50 bits of the address are network designation. This leaves the remaining 78 bits (IPv6 addresses are 128 bits long) for
the host. That would be an incredible large network.

##TCP

Moving to the transport layer, I first run across the TCP. Where IP is a best effort protocol, meaning that a best effort is made to get messages from
one system to another, TCP is said to have guaranteed delivery. There are mechanisms in the protocol that keep track of all the messages that are sent,
and if something doesn't get to the other end and is acknowledged there, messages will be resent.

The PDU for TCP is called a segment.

The layers I have looked at so far have forms of addressing. The Transport layer is no different. Where previous addresses are related to the systems
to ensure messages get from one system to another, we start to become concerned about getting messages to the application. They also provide
multiplexing. Without ports, we wouldn't be able to have multiple applications listening on the same system. With ports, we have a large capacity for
conversations with other systems.

There are fields in the TCP headers:

- Source Port: The source port is the port that the traffic originated from on the sending side. This is important because conversations are not one
way. For the recipient to be able to respond, it needs a port to send back to. When messages are responded to, the source and destination ports are
reversed. The source ports is 16 bits in length.

- Destination Port: It's the one that is associated with an application. Every conversation has a client side and a server side. The server side binds
an application to a listening port. The clients sends to this port as the destination port. If the server is sending from the server to the client,
the destination port is the ephemeral port assigned to the application that is communicating with the server. The dest port is 16 bit in length.

- Sequence Number:

- Acknowledgment Number:

- Data Offset:

- Reserved:

- Control Bits:

- Window:

- Checksum:

- Urgent Pointer:

- Options:

TCP uses multiple mechanisms to ensure a reliable service. The first is that TCP is connected-oriented. Connections are established using what is
called a three-way handshake. The handshake ensures that both sides of the conversation are live and active because they are expected to respond.

##UDP

##Internet Control Message Protocol

The ICMP is a special case when it comes to protocols, in that it doesn't carry user data. Instead, it works with other protocols to provide error
and control messaging. When something unexpected happens on the network, devices will generate ICMP messages to send back to the originating device
to let them know that there was a problem. It does sit on top of IP, because it needs the addressing of IP, but it is considered to be part of the
Internet layer as IP is. This also makes it a bit of an unusual protocol, because it sort of sits above the Network layer but isn't a Transport layer
protocol.

ICMP is efined in RFC 792, which specifies a header of 8 bytes. This consists of the type and code fields, which convey the essential information for
ICMP, a checksum field, and then 4 bytes that are labeled "rest of header". The type and code are each a byte, and the checksum is 2 bytes. The rest
of the header field contains data related to the type and code. The type and code define what goes into those 4 bytes.

The type message indicates the message being sent. It may have values that refer to echo reply, echo request, destination unreachable, source quench,
or time stamp messages. Each type may have multiple subtypes. The different subtypes are specified by the code field.

Anyone doing security testing or pentest will most commonly run across ICMP messages through the use of ICMP echo request and echo reply messages.
These are used by the ping program. I may also use the traceroute program to get the network route to a destination. The traceroute program relies on
two ICMP messages. The first is ICMP type 11, which is time exceeded in transit. When the traceroute completes, the program expects to get an ICMP
type 3, destination unreachable message. This is dependent, in part, on the implementation of traceroute.

##Network Architectures

Pulling the topology together with data flows and other network elements will give me a network architecture. This describes the protocols that are
used and where they are used, and I may also get security enclaves as part of a network architecture. I'll also have to contend with the idea of
multiple locations.

From a security perspective, there are other elements to consider, including isolation. This may mean categorizing systems based on usage and risk.
Some systems, especially those that need to be directly facing the Internet -- meaning that external users will make network connections to those
systems as normal course of operation -- may be kept separate and protected from systems where users are or even where sensitive data is stored.

###Network Types

I can have systems that are hundreds of miles apart appearing as though they are on the same physical network segment together. Because of that, I can
talk about diff types of networks based on their geography:

- Local Area Network (LAN): All of the systems are local and probably in the same room. These systems would be in the same broadcast domain or
collision domain, phrases that mean the systems can communicate using layer 2 without having to route to other networks. However, they may not
necessarily be communicating using layer 2. They could still be local but on a separate network segment, which would mean the traffic btw those
network segments would need to be routed.
- Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN): A VLAN is a LAN where the isolation at layer 2 is handled by software/firmware rather than physically. This means
that some switches can be segmented into separate networks with some systems on one network segment (VLAN) and some systems on another network
segment (VLAN). To get from one VLAN to another, the traffic would have to cross over a layer 3 boundary (router). This sort of segregation helps to 
maintain network performance. It also helps with logical organization on of the network so the same set of traffic policies can be applied across the
entire VLAN. With a VLAN, I can place a firewall btw my network segments. While I can run host-based firewalls, it's far easier to maintain a single
network firewall and restrict traffic based on the needs of each network to cross the layer 3 boundaries.
- Wide Area Network (WAN): A WAN is a network whose nodes are more than 10 or so miles apart. Any ISP would have a WAN. Businesses may have WANs
where they have network connections that provide links btw their different office locations. There are number of ways to provide that sort of
connectivity btw geographically dispersed locations, including virtual private networks, private network circuits, or just tunneling traffic without
encrypting it as virtual private network would do.
- Metropolitan Area Network (MAN): A MAN sits btw LAN and WAN. I may find this if a company has a campus with multiple buildings. Each building would
have a LAN (or multiple LANs), but the connection of LANs btw all the building would be a MAN. The same would be true if a city had connections btw
all of its different offices and buildings, spread around the city. Those connections would be a MAN

##Isolation

Network isolation is an important concept. In fact, it's a widely recognized approach to separating network elements in order to protect sensitive
data. Additionally, it would be used to separate externally accessible systems from those that are strictly internal. There are several ways to
achieve this isolation.

A common approach is to use a demilitarized zone (DMZ). This is a network segment where any untrusted system would be placed. Access to this network
segment could be tightly controlled using a firewall or access control lists. The DMZ may hold systems like the web server, for example. It may also
hold an email gateway to filter messages coming in before sending them on to the internal email server. There are many uses for a DMZ to isolate
untrusted systems from the remainder of the network. An untrusted system is one that anyone from the internet can get access to, which means it could
be compromised in some way through the service that's exposed. Firewalls and/or access control lists prevent people from the outside getting access to
internal suystems. It also prevents any system inside the DMZ from commnicating with systems inside the enterprise.

If I'm using a DMZ, that suggests network isolation along with tight access control and restrictive rules around acessing the network. Network 
segmentation can also isolate other systems, without necessarily introducing the firewall rules or access control lists. There may also be many other
network segments. Each of them would have different trust levels. For example, there may also be a guest network to allow vendors and other visitors
to have network access without any ability to get access to any of the internal systems.

DMZs are not the only way to isolate networks. Protecting the rest of the network from Internet-facing services is also not the only reason to do
network isolation. A common way of protecting higly sensitive information is to use enclaves. An enclave is an isolated network segment where tight
controls may be placed. if I had any payment card data, such as credit card information, for instance, the systems may require not only additional
protections but also additional monitoring. This may involve firewalls and intrusion detection systems, both at the network and host levels.

Orgs may have several enclaves that are created for specific types of data. Credit card data (often called PCI for the org, Payment Card Industry,
that manages the data security standards) is a common one, but I may also see an enclave for personal health information (PHI).

I may run across microsegmentation, where segments are defined based on workload, which is the collection of systems and services necessary for an 
application to function. This can be done easily in a virtual environment, where I can contain systems within the hypervisor or other control
platform that manages the virtual infrastructure. Additionally, though, software is being used to provide this level of segmentation. The
microsegmentation allows security controls to be applied across a specific set of systems related to an application or service.

###Remote Access

This wouldn't normally be handled across the open Internet but instead through the use of encryption. Virtual private networks are a way to gain
access to the internal network from remote locations. VPNs, though, are not all created equal. There are different ways to accomplish this remote
access.

In some cases, the remote access is a satellite office. In that case, it may not make sense to have direct, private line from site to site. Instead,
the network provider may offer something within their network to get from one location to the other. This may be done using Multiprotocol Label
Switching (MPLS), for example. MPLS provides what is essentially a tunnel from one location to another by encapsulating traffic inside a label where
the traffic gets switched from one location to the other.

More commonly, at least in terms of volume, there is a need for user-to-network connectivity. Even here, there are multiple ways to accomplish the
task. One way, which has been around for decades at this point, was part of the work on IPv6. IP Security (IPSec) is a set of extensions that,
in part, provide for encryption from one location to another. IPSec comes with a number of protocols that provide not only encryption but also
message authentication, user authentication and key exchange. Because IPSec isn't an inherent part of IPv4, it requires the use of some other
mechanism to implement over IPv4 networks.

Another type of VPN connection is a Web connection that use Transport Layer Secure (TLS), which is the current implementation of encryption for web
traffic, superseding Secure Sockets Layer (SSL). As this is a well know and commonly used methods of encryption, companies often have many of the
infrastructure requirements necessary to implement ths type of VPN.

##Cloud Computing

There are a number of cloud computing services.


