#Topics covered: Code of conduct, Appropriateness of hacking and Five phases of ethical hacking.

Ethical hacking or Penetration testing.

To keep myself viable as a professional I need to behave and perform my work in an ethical manner. As part of the code of ethics, I will be sworn
to keep information I obtain as part of my work private, paying particular attention to protecting the information and intelectual property of
employers and clients. When I am attacking systems that belong to other people, I could be provided with internal information that is sensitive.
I could also come across some critical information vital to the organization for which I am working. Failing to protect any of that data violates
the code of ethics by compromising the confidentiality of that information.

I am expected to disclose information that needs to be disclosed to the people who have engaged my services. This includes any issues that I have
identified. I am also expected to disclose potential conflicts of interest that I may have. It's important to be transparent in my dealings and
also do the right thing when it comes to protecting my clients, employers and their business interests. Additionally, if I come across something
that could have an impact on a large number of people across the Internet, I am expected to disclose it in a responsible manner.

There will be times when the testing I am performing may cause damage to a service provided by the infrastructure of the company I am working for or
with. As long as this is unintentional or agreed to be acceptable by the company, this is okay. One way to alleviate this concern is to keep lines
of communications open at all times. If it happens that an unexpected outage occurs, ensuring that the right people know so it can be remedies is
essential.

When I am taking on a new engagement, it's essential to be clear about the expectations for my services. If I have the scope in writing,
everyting is clear and documented.

#Overview of Ethical Hacking

There is an urgent need to improve how information security is handled. It's believed that to protect against attacks, I have to be able to
understand those attacks. Ideally, I need to replicate the attacks. If businesses are testing attacks against their own infrastructure early and
often, those businesses could be in a better position to improve their defenses and keep the real attackers out.

This type os testing is what ethical hacking really is. It's all about ferreting out problems wth the goal of improving the overall security
posture of the target. This may be for a company in terms of their infrastructure or even desktop systems. It may also be performing testing
against software to identify bugs that can be used to compromise the software and, subsequently, the system where the software is running.

Ethical hacking can be done under many different names. I may not always see the term ethical hacking, especially when I am looking at the job
titles. I may see the term penetration testing or red teaming, which is generally considered a specific type of pen test where the testers are
adversarial to the organization and network under test. A red teamer would actually act like an attacker, meaning they would try to be stealthy
so as not to be detected.

One of the challeging aspects of this sort of activity is having to think like an attacker. Testing of this nature is often challenging and
requires a different way of thinking. When doing any sort of testing, including ethical hacking, a methodology is important, as it helps ensure
that my actions are both repeatable and verifiable. 

#Attack Modeling

Using a methodology is valuable when it comes to ethical hacking or security testing. Methodology can help with consistency, repeatability and
process improvement.

There are some testing or assessment methodologies that get used throughout the industry, including the Penetration Testing Execution Standard
(PTES) and the Open Source Security Testing Methodology Manual (OSSTMM). These methodologies are typically built around expectations of what an
attacker would do or how attackers operate. These may not map perfectly to how attackers operate in the real world, but they do help to ensure
a consistency and breadth of approach to security testing, which makes them valuable. In addition, many common security testing methodologies are
models of how attackers operate. The first is the cyber kill chain, another is the attack life cycle, while a third is the MITRE ATT&CK framework.

##Cyber Kill Chain

A kill chain is a military concept of the structure of an attack. The idea of a kill chain is that I can identify where the attacker is in their
process so I can adapt my own response tactics.

The 1st phase of cyber kill chain is RECONNAISSANCE -> Research, identification and selection of targets;
The 2nd phase is WEAPONIZATION -> Pairing remote access malware with exploit into a delivery payload;
The 3rd phase is DELIVERY -> Transmission of weapon to target (via email attachments, websites, network-based attack or USB drives);
The 4th phase is EXPLOITATION -> Once delivered, the weapon's code is triggered, exploiting vulnerable applications or systems;
The 5th phase is INSTALLATION -> The weapon installs a backdoor on a target's system, allowing persistent access;
The 6th phase is COMMAND & CONTROL -> Outside server communicates with the weapons providing "hands-on keyboard access" inside the target's network;
The 7th phase is ACTIONS ON OBJECTIVE -> The attacker works to achieve the objective of the intrusion, which can include exfiltration or
destruction of data, or intrusion of another target, there is a lot of activity that happens in this phase.

##Attack Lifecycle

This is different from the cyber kill chain but there are some similarities. The attack life cycle describes exactly how attackers have operated
for as far back as there have been attacks against computing infrastructure.

One significant difference btw the attack life cycle and the cyber kill chain is a recognition that often an attack is not one-and-done.There is a
loop that happens in the middle. Attackers don't keep launching attacks from outside the network. Once they get into the environment, they use
compromised systems as launch points for additional compromises within the environment. Attackers will gain access to a system and use that system
and anything discovered there, like credentials, to move off to another system in the network. Before we get there, though, an attacker identifies
a victim and potential attack possibilities in the initial recon stage. The attacker is doing reconnaissance, including identifying names and
titles using open source intelligence, meaning they use public sources like social network sites, to generate attacks. To gain access, they launch
attacks -- commonly, these would be phishing attacks. This is the initial compromise stage.

Once, they have compromised a system, the attacker will work to establish a foothold. This includes making sure they retain access to the system so
they can get back in when they need to. It's perharps important to recognize that these attacks don't happen in a bang-bang fashion. It may take
days or weeks to move from one phase of the attack life cycle to another. These depends on the organization performing the attacks. These are not
individuals. They are organizations, so there may be different employees working on different stages.

To do much else, the attacker will need to escalate privileges. They need to have administrative privileges to move into the loop that happens as
they continue to move through the environment, gathering additional systems along the way. They will probably be gathering credentials from
memory or disk here. They will also be investigating connections the system is known to have had with other systems in the network. This is a form
of internal reconnaissance. They may also be trying to identify other credentials that are known to the system.

The reconnaissance is necessary to be able to move laterally. This is sometimes known as east-west movement. To make those lateral movements,
attackers need to know what systems there are. It may be servers, since individual systems are likely to know a lot of servers they communicate with,
but it may also be individual workstations. In an enterprise network, it may be possible to authenticate using captured credentials against other
workstations, which may have access to different sets of servers.

With every system the attacker gets access to, they need to maintain presence. This means some form of persistence, so any malware that is allowing
the attacker access remains running. I might use the Windows registry, scheduled tasks, or other types of persistence to keep any malware running so
the attacker can keep getting back in when they want.

The last phase of the attack life cycle, though leaving it until the end is misleading, is complete mssion. Again, attacks tend not to be
one-and-done. Once the attacker is in my environment, they will likely be continuing to revisit to see if there is anything else they need. They
may be continuing to get broader reach within the organization. The complete mission phase is where data may be exfiltrated from the environment.
The attacker may coontinue to find additional targets in the environment to explot, which would likely mean additional exfiltration. This means
there would be continuous returns to this phase. After all, if I am planning to take up years-long residence, I don't want to wait years before
getting data out because I can't, as an attacke, ever know something may change and I lose access.

##MITRE ATT&CK Framework

While the attack life cycle does a good job of describing the process an attacker goes through, it does not describe the specific behaviors used by
the attacker, which are called techniques, tactics and procedures (TTPs). The MITRE ATT&CK Framework is a taxonomy of TTPs, which means it is a way
of organizing TTPs that have been seen in the real world into a set of categories. Mostly, the categories follow the same attack trajectory seen
in the attack life cycle and the cyber kill chain, though there are some categories that are called out separately because it's useful to understand
some of the specific TTP categories that may be done in a parallel stream or be part of multiple stages of the attack life cycle or cyber kill chain.
Examples include resource development and execution.

- Reconnaissance: The attacker is looking for victims or way to get into victim's systems that have been identified; 
- Resource Development: Infra for managing compromised hosts is put together here, as well as developing exploits or collecting credentials from other
sources that could be used;
- Initial Access: Systems or user accounts are compromised to provide the attacker access to a resource that can be used;
- Execution: This is not a stage itself, but instead describes a series of actions or behaviors an attacker might use to maintain access for the
system. This could include, for instance, executing Power Shell scripts;
- Persistence: The attacker needs to ensure they maintain access beyond reboots or other system changes, so they need to be sure they have a program
that always runs when the system is started, or at least when a user logs in;
- Privilege Escalation: A user behavior is restricted, attackers would typically look to gain administration privileges. The process of obtaining that
level of permissions is called privilege excalation;
- Defense Evasion: Businesses will do a lot of work trying to protect systems, looking for malware and instances of persistence. When attackers try
to get access and maintain access regardless of the protection measures in place, it's defense evasion and may include masquerading or execution
hijacking or tampering with protections in place;
- Credential Access: A common attack pratice is to gather usernames and passwords. This may be done either from previous or from systems or users
directly. Any username and password set may be useful at some point;
- Discovery: Any activity that collects information within the victim environment could be considered discovery;
- Lateral Movement: Attackers will generally move from one system to another within the victim environment, to collect more information or to gather
details about systems or users that could be used elsewhere;
- Collection: Once the attacker has found information they want to use or sell, they need to pull it together. This is the collection referred to here.
It may be something simple like staging the data somewhere in the network;
- Command and Control: The attacker needs a way of getting remote access to systems or to send commands to those systems. Usually, there is infra in
place to perform this C&C work. With firewalls in place, direct access to victim systems is not commonly possible so the connection needs to be
initialized from the inside of the network
- Exfiltration: Data that has been collected needs to be moved out to the attacker locations so it can be dealt with. Moving the data out of the
target environment to the attacker's place is exfiltration.
- Impact: Attackers aren't always looking to steal information. Sometimes, they are looking to be destrcutive, or in the case of some types of
ransomware, they are looking to modify data by encrypting it.

These TTPs are different from a collection of exploits.

#Methodology of Ethical Hacking

One thing to keep in mind when it comes to information security is that not everything is about protection or prevetion. I need to be able to detect
all of these attacker activities.

##Reconnaissance and Footprinting

Recon is where I gather info about the target. I want to understand the scope of my endeavor up front, of course. This will help me narrow my actions
so I'm not engaging in anything that could be unethical. I'll have some sense of who my target is, but I may not have all the details. Gathering the
details of my target is one of the reasons for performing recon.

The objective of recon and footprinting s determining the size and scope of my test. Footprinting is just getting an idea of the "footprint" of the
organization, meaning the size and appearance. This means, trying to identify network blocks, hosts, locations and people. The info gathered here
will be used later as I progress through additional stages.

Keep in mind that while I am looking for details about my target, I will find not only network blocks, which may exist within enterprise networks,
but also potentialy single hosts, which may belong to systems that are hosted with a service provider. As these systems will run services that may
provide entry points or just house sensitive data, it's necessary to keep track of everything I gather and not limit myself to information available
about network blocks that the company may have.

In the process of doing this work, I may also turn up personal info belonging to employees at my target. This will be useful when it comes to social
engineering attacks. These sorts of attacks are commonplace. In fact, some estimates suggest that 80 to 90 percent of infiltrations are a result of
these social engineering attacks.

##Scanning and Enumeration

Once I have




















