#Topics covered: Elements of infosec, risk management and info assurance.

Orgs spend lots of money and time on defenses and mitigations against attacks. There are some fundamental concepts that go into the planning and
implementation of these defenses.

Alongside knowing what you are protecting against, I need to know what I'm protecting. Performing risk assessments will help with that. Identifying
potential risks and associated potential losses can help with decision making around where to expend limited resources -- budget, staffing, capital
expenditures, and so on. It'll also help security professionals determine what policies they need in place to guide the actions of employees overall
and, more specifically, info tech staff. From policies flow standards and procedures. They are all considered essential for determining how a company
approaches protecting its information assets.

Once I have my policies in place, decisions can be made about how best to protect information resources. Beyond staffing, there is technology that can
be brought to bear.

The technology alone doesn't provide protection. Where these elements and devices are placed is important, and those decisions are made based on ideas
such as defense in depth and defense in breadth.

#The CIA triad

The triad is a set of three attributes, or properties, that define what security is. The elements are confidentiality, integrity and availability. Each of
these properties needs to be taken into consideration when developing security plans. Each of them, to varying degrees of importance, will be essential in
planning defenses. Not every defense will incorporate each of the three properties to the same extent. Some defenses impact only one property, for instance.
From an attack perspective, a tester or adversary would be looking to compromise one of these elements within an organization. The properties all have equal
value when it comes to the overall security posture of an organization. If any of the properties is removed or compromised, the security of my org has also
been compromised. It takes all these properties to ensure that me and my informaton are being protected.

##Confidentiality

Confidentiality means keeping secrets. This encompasses a lot of different aspects. It means making sure no one gets unauthorized access to information. This
may mean using strong passwords on my user accounts to make sure attackers can't get in. It may mean keeping certain information offline so it can't be access
remotely. Commonly, though, a simple way to achieve confidentiality is through the use of encryption.

When I talk about confidentiality, I should be thinking about it in two dimensions - static and dynamic. Static would be protecting data that is considered "at
rest", which means is not moving. The dynamic is when the data is moving or "in motion". This refers to data when it is being sent from one place to another. As
the data is being transmitted, it is in motion. It's this transmission that makes it dynamic and not necessarily that is being altered, though data being sent
from one place to another could definitely be experiencing alteration through interaction with the user and the application.

When I'm making use of encryption for web based communication, the Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) protocols are used. While TLS has long
since superseded SSL, it is still sometimes referred to as SSL/TLS. Regardless of how it's referred to, though, it is a set of mechanisms for encryption data. SSL
and TLS both specify how to generate encryption keys from data that is known, as well as some partial data that is transmitted from one side to the other.

Since encrypted data can't be read without a key, the confidentiality of the data is protected. 

##Integrity

A man-in-the-middle attack is one way for an attacker to compromise integrity. The attacker intercepts the data in transit, alters it and sends it on the way. When I
browse to a website that uses encryption, a certificate is used to provide keying, meaning the certificate holds keys used for encryption and decryption. When a certificate
contains a name that is different from the hostname being visited, my browser will generate an error.

A certificate might show that it belongs to site.com. However, the website that was visited was etis.com.br. If I did not know that one website belongs to the other, I might
begin to question whether I was being hijacked in some way. An attack in this situation may have resulted in an attacker gathering information from my session, which I
wouldn't have expected because I believed the session was encrypted. Worse, the information I got could have been altered while the attacker got the real information.

Note: Uma sessao nada mais eh do que identificacao do visitante. Entao, quando eu acesso um site, talvez ele defina uma "sessao" para mim, ou seja uma identificacao. Em
determinado momento, eu faco login. Essa informacao sera atualizada na sessao que me identifica no servidor.

Integrity, it turns out, is very complex.

##Availability

The most commonly compromised property. It comes down to whether information or services are available to the user when they are expected to be.

##Parkerian Hexad

There are three additional properties:
- Possession (or Control);
- Authenticity or Nonrepudiation;
- Utility;

#Information Assurance and Risk

Risk is the intersection of loss and probability. Probabilities of information security events are hard to calculate. Loss is easier to quantify.
$risk = probability * loss.

It can be tempting to think about risk as loss. Predicting every possible event can be challenging. This is what makes information security difficult --
understanding events, probabilities and outcomes for my org and then planning to protect against negative events.

A threat is something that has the possibility to incur a breach of confidentiality, integrity or availability. The avenue this breach may take is called a vulnerability.
A vulnerability is a weakness in a system. This may be its software, its configuration, or how the entire information solution is put together. When the vulnerability is
triggered, it is called an exploit. We exploit vulnerabilities, though not all vulnerabilities can be exploited. Race conditions are examples of vulnerabilities that may
not be able to be exploited.

A threat agent or a threat actor is an entity, like a person or grooup, that can instantiate a threat. The threat agent is who manifests a threat. The pathway the
threat agent takes to exploit a vulnerability is called a threat vector. All of these concepts are important because they help to better understand where risk lies.
Once I have identified what resources I care about, I should think about what threat agents may care about those resources. This can help me to identify potential
vulnerabilities. Once I know what my vulnerabilities are and the potential threat vectors, I can start to think about how I am going to protect against those threats.

Information assurance is the practice of identifying risks associated with the information assets, then instituting controls to better protect the asset or
resource. A control is a means of ensuring the confidentiality, integrity or availability of an information security resource. These controls may be preventive, detective
or corrective. A preventive control is one that intends to keep something bad from happening. Unfortunately, ths is not always possible, which means
detective controls are useful. A detective control is one where a violation of confidentiality, integrity or availability is identified so the violation can
be addressed. Finally, a corrective control is one that intends to limit the amount of damage that may have been confused.

Security controls end up having two factors. In addition to controls having goals, as described earlier, they will fall into one of three different types. A control
may be technical, administrative or physical. A technical control is hardware or software that has been implemented to provide protection of assets. This may be an
authentication solution, a firewall, antivirus or a security incident and event manager used to alert on something bad happening. An administrative control is
is a policy, procedure, or guideline that gives direction on how protections should be implemented. Finally, physical controls are used to keep people away from
assets in a kinetic way, meaning someone can't walk up to a building and just enter it.

Information assurance is about managing risk. This means not just identifying risk and how to categorize it, but also making business decisions about how to handle the risk.
Businesses may handle risk in different ways, depending on the level of risk and their risk appetite.

- Acceptance: It's an informed process where the business fully understands the nature of the risk, meaning the impact and the probability and choose not to do anything
about the risk. This means if the risk is actualized , the business will be responsible for all the losses and costs associated with it, as well as any other damage that
may result. This approach means nothing else is done to the circumstances related to the risk identified.

- Transference: The business may choose to transfer the risk to another entity to manage in some way. One common way to implement risk transference is to buy insurance.

- Mitigation: Risk mitigation is implementing controls that will reduce the risk. Risk reduction can occur on the two vectors that constitute risk -- loss and probability.

- Avoidance: Business may choose to not engage in the activity that could introduce risk to begin with.

#Policies, Standards and Procedures

Security is a business enabler, not a business driver. Because security is a business enabler, the business sets the parameters around what is important and the means
to protect what is important. It does that by creating policies. Once the policies are created, standards are built out of those policies. Closest to where the
work actually gets done are procedures. These are developed because of what the standards say.

##Security Policies

A security policy is a statement of intention with regard to the resources of a business. It defines what a company considers to be security -- what resources need to be
protected, how resources should be utilized in a proper manner, how resources can or should be accessed. These policies are essential to good corporate governance,
since the policies are lines that management draws. This means that having management set the tone and direction is not only a good idea, it's also required.
Management and the board of directors have an obligation to the stakeholders in the business -- the individual owners or the shareholders.

Security policies are not only about defining important resources, they are also about setting expectations of employees. Many organizations, for example, have
an acceptable use policy. This is about defining what users can and cannot do.

Keep in mind as I'm thinking about security policy that the goals of my policies should be the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information resources.
All information resources should be confidential, have integrity and be available within the parameters defined by the business. Different information assets will have
different levels of confidentiality, and not all information has to be available all the time. This is also part of what security policy is for -- to help
classify and prioritize the information assets of the org.

Not all information resources are bits and bytes stored on computer systems. One area that policy should always take into consideration is how the human resources
are to be handled.

Policies should be revisited on a regular basis. They are sufficiently high-level that they shouldn't change every time there is a new set of technologies available,
but they should evolve with changes in the threat landscape. As information resources change and threat agents change, the policies may need to adapt to be
responsive to those changes. As this is an area of corporate governance, any policy change would have to be approved by whatever management structure is in place --
business owners; board of directors and so on.

Keep in mind that security policies are all high-level. They don't provide specifics, such as how the policies should be implemented. If I'm looking at security policies
and I'm starting to think about the operational impacts and how the admiistrative would handle the policy, I'm too close to the ground, and it's time to beat my wings
a bit more to get much higher up. Also, I'm thinking conceptually for what should be long-term rather than something specific to a point in time. This means that technology
and solutions have no place in the policy. Other information security program elements will take care of those aspects.

##Security Standards

The security policy is at the top of the food chain. There may also be subpolicies that flow down from the top-level security policies. The subpolicy should
refer to the overall policy so the high-level policy doesn't get lost. Below the policy level, though, are security standards. A standard is direction about how policies
should be implemented. The standard starts down the path of how we get from statements of intent to implementation, so I start to drill down from the high level of the
policy.

There are two meanings for the term security standard.

There are sets of standards that provide guidance for organizations and are managed by standards bodies. The NIST has a set of standards, documented in several special
publications. The ISO maintains ISO 27001 and ISO 27002. There are other standards documents that may be relevant to me, depending where I'm in the world.

The second type of standard is one that provides detailed guidance for how to implement policies within orgs.

For example, a policy that states that all systems will be kept up-to-date. To get closer to implementation of that policy, I might have standards that relate to
desktop systems, server systems, network devices. The requirement for each of those device types may be different, so the standards for them may be different.
Desktop systems may just be expected to take all updates as they come, with the expectation that any potential outage could be remediated quickly on the off chance
that there was an outage on a handful of users' desktops.

Servers, on the other hand, would be in place to service customers and possibly have revenue impacts. Since that's the case, the standard may be different. The
standard, still focused on how to achieve the objective set out in the policy, may say that there is a quality assurance process that is necessary before patches
may be deployed. The service level agreement (SLA) on those server systems may be completely different in terms of acceptable outages. The standard for the
server systems may be different from the desktop systems, but both are written in service of the high-level policy that systems are kept up-to-date. The standard
would define anything that was vague in the policy to make it relevant to operational staff.

The standards are still high level in the sense of setting requirements for how policies should be implemented. These requirements still need to be implemented.
That leads me to another step.

##Procedures

Procedures are the actual implementation of the standard. These provide guidance about how, specifically, the standards are achieved at a granular level. This may
be accomplished with step-by-step instructions on what needs to be done. There may be multiple procedures for each standard, since there may be multiple orgs involved
in implementing the standard.

I can see that with high level guidance like that in policy, I likely wouldn't have to touch it often. Policies are revisited on a regular basis, but the time scale
for when the policies change would be measured in years, if the policies are well considered and well written. Standards, though, may need to be updated more regularly
Information asset changes would result in standards being updated. Any change in technology within the organization may result in an update to standards. Procedures
will likely change even more regularly.

As orgs in the company shift or responsibilities shift, procedures will shft to accommodate them. Additionally, a good procedure would have feedback loops built in
so the procedure could be regularly revised to be more efficient. Any change in automation would result in procedure changes. As we go through each layer from the 
top of the security program down to the very bottom, the result is more regular updates as we get to specific steps in implementations and administration.

##Guidelines

I may not run into guidelines as I'm looking at security programs. Guidelines are not standards in that they may not be requirements. Instead, they are suggestions
on how policies may be implemented. A guideline may provide information about best practices, with the hope that the best practices may follow.

#Organizing my Protections

There are a lot of diff ways of thinking about infosec. From a governance perspective, I need to think about policies, standards and procedures. However, once I have
all of those in place, I still need to think about how I'm going to best protect my assets, not to mention ensure I'm able to detect any attempt to negatively impact
those assets, no matter what they are. One way to think about evaluating protections of my assets is by reviewing what attackers are most likely to do. If I know
what actions the attackers are going to take, I could develop not only protections but also detections of those actions, which helps me to be prepared. While I can 
use the Lockheed Martin cyber kill chain or the attack lifecycle advocated by FireEye Mandiant, another way to get even more detail is to make use of the MITRE
ATT&ck Framework.

The MITRE Corp developed ATT&CK in 2013 to collect common tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs) used by attackers. The way MITRE saw it, existing frameworks
like the cyber kill chain were too high level and not applicable to real world incidents. The idea behind ATT&CK is to collect these TTPs from adversaries, so
the collection is always growing as more TTPs are identified. These TTPs are described in detail, so protection and detection controls can be developed.

While there are diff attacker types, including hacktivists who may be just looking to make a point in the public consciousness, the most dangereous ones are ones
that are sometimes called advanced persistent threats (APTs). These are attackers who use a large number of TTPs to gain access to a business environment for as
long as they can. In some cases, these attackers may remain in place for years. There have been cases in recent memory where attackers have been found to have
remained in place for seven or ten years or more. While I may get some attackers who might do a one-and-done approach, where they are targeting individual
users and want to just get what they can and get out, increasingly, what we see s these APT attackers. This is worth keeping in mind as I look through the diff
phases of the ATT&CK framework.

The ATT&CK Framework is broken out into the following stages. I may find these aren't necessarily in the order an attacker may follow, as there may be some overlap
or even bouncing back and forth. Additionally, some TTPs will fit into diff categories here

- Reconnaissance: The attacker is gathering info about the target in this stage. They may be searching through open sources where data is freely available.
They may be using closed sources they have access to. Additionally, they may be performing scanning activities here. This stage also includes attackers using
phishing techniques to trick victims to give up data;

- Resource Development: The attacker has to do a lot of work to create an infrastructure they will use to launch attacks from. This may include registering
domain names, creating accounts, acquiring systems (probably by compromising other victims and using their computing infrastructure). They may also need to
acquire tools they don't have themselves. This could be renting or purchasing toolset that may be available through criminal channels;

- Initial Access: The attacker here compromises the first systems. They may compromise an existing public-facing application or website. They may use
phishing to get malware installed on a target system. They are getting their initial foothold into the organization in this stage. Any technique that gives
them access, even if it's as simple as making use of a compromised set of credentials, falls into this stage;

- Execution: There are a lot of techniques an attacker may use to get code executed. The attacker doesn't always have direct interactive access to the
system, meaning they can't just double click an icon or run a CLI program. They may rely on other techniques to get their code executed. There are a lot
ways of doing this, including using scheduled tasks, interprocess communication, system services or operating system -- specific techniques like using the
Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) system.

- Persistence: With persistence, the attacker is trying to maintain consistent access to the system they have compromised. Systems reboot, sometimes they
are powered down and later restarted, or sometimes users log out and then later log back in. This means programs that are executing will stop executing 
unless there is a way to get the program executing again. As the attacker is not sitting physically at the system, where they can do what they want, it's
necessary for the attacker to have a means of getting remote access. This is often done through software the attacker has installed on the system. This
software needs to execute, likely when the system boots. This is another case where system services are useful, though scheduled tasks are also useful as are
system and user configs through technicques like registry keys on Windows systems. Linux systems may use startup files such as .bashrc to get programs
executed when a user logs in.

- Privilege Escalation: With privilege escalation, attackers are trying to get the highest level of privileges they can. Most users don't have much in the way
of access to their systems. They can get to their data and run programs, but they can't do useful things like install system services or extract system memory.
This is where getting additional, elevated privilege is helpful. They may do this by injecting code into an existing process that already has administrative
privileges. They may get a service to run at boot time, since the boot process automatically has elevated privileges. There are a lot of TTPs for privilege
escalation since it's often a necessary step for an attacker to remain in the environment and gather data, like credentials, they need for further movement.

- Defense Evasion: Attackers will need to get through a lot of diff types of defenses. Businesses certainly, though people as well, make use of software
on systems to protect against these very attackers. This may be anti-malware or some other detection or prevention software. Attackers need to execute
software in ways that won't be seen as malicious or suspicious. This may be using an old school technique like using a rootkit, where the attacker may be
provided remote access while also hiding all of the software being used from the user or other software looking for it. By far, this is the stage or category
with the most TTPs. As an example, privilege escalation, an important phase in the attack process, has 12 techniques as of this writing, whereas defense
evasion has 37.

- Credential Access: Applications and systems typically require usernames and passwords to grant access. Attackers will want to try to get these credentials
for use elsewhere. This may be through using a phishing attack by sending an email to a victim to get that person to provide username and password to the
attacker. It may be from dumping credentials out of memory -- from the OS but also from applications that may be holding on to credentials. Attackers may also
be able to use tactics to get the network to give up credentials by forcing authentication against network servers that can provide info to the attacker;

- Discovery: Attackers are probably not going to be satisfied getting access to just my system. They will be looking for additional systems to get access to.
They will want to look around at what I have access to, from systems to applications. They will be gathering a lot of detail to see what else they may be able
to access within the target environment.

- Lateral Movement: One of the reasons for doing discovery, in addition to seeing what data I may have access to that may be stolen for profit is to determine
what other systems may be attacked from my system, The attacker may make use of me and whatever my system has access to. The idea here is to compromise a lot
of systems because more systems means more data that could be used or stolen. This may be through the use of existing credentials that have already been stolen.
It may be through the use of the email of the current victim to contact other potential victims.

- Collection: Just as with discovery, collection is about gathering information. This may be information that could be used to attack other systems, or it could
info the attacker wnats to steal (exfiltrate) for sale or use somewhere else. Once an attacker starts to collect data, this may be more visible than some of the
other stages because they are leaving behind artifacts. After all, while they are collecting data, that data has to be stored somewhere. Because the attacker will
be storing info temporarily ahead of exfiltration, files with strange names or other distinguishing characteristics may start showing up in places;

- Command and Control: Keep in mind that attackers will want to maintain access to the systems for as long as possible. After all, if they have targeted my org,
I have something they want. It's likely I will continue to create this thing they want, whether it's intellectual property or customer info or usernames and
passwords or credit card data. There's no point in wasting an opportunity by getting in and then leaving. This menas they need to retain remote control over
the entire environment. This stage is where they set up remote access to the systems in the environment. They may make use of commonly used protocols like
the HTTP and abuse it by embeding commands btw the server they control and systems in my environment. They can also misuse other protocols like DNS or ICMP;

- Exfiltration: Even if they continue to remain in the environment, they will want to get data they have collected out. This is where they exfiltrate the data.
They, again, may make use of commonly used protocols since they are less likely to be suspected. The goal is always going to be evading detection as best as
possible. However, even when they use commonly used protocols, I can detect the existence of the attacker by following the TTPs provided in the framework.
If an attacker is sending data out using DNS, for instance, the message size is likely to be unusually large, so looking for those unusually large messages
may let me catch the attacker n action;

- Impact: This is where the attacker may decide to burn the house down, as it were. Some attackers will get what they want and then tear everything down as
they leave. Others may do the same if they happen to be caught. As I'm trying to get them out of my network and systems, they are tearing down as much as
they can on they way out. This may be destruction of data, disk wiping, encryption of data, DOS attack ...

The TTPs referenced in the matrix, which I can find on the MITRE website are regularly updated as more become known. Each TTP will have details associated
with it, and MITRE will provide mitigation steps to prevent the attack from suceeding to begin with. I may also get advice on how to determine whether the
attacker is making use of that TTP. 

#Security Technology

Invariably, security programs require some technology to implement. Today, the attack vectors have changed a lot from what they were even a decade ago.
Today's technical solutions are multilayered and aren't entirely focused on prevention.

The assumption today is that prevention isn't popssible if the expectation is that 100 percent of attacks will be repelled. As a result, detection is essential.
Even detection solutions are multilayered because of the number of entry points into the network. Since the detection is a passive effort it needs to be followed
by an active one. This can be incident response, and incident response may require automated collection of artifacts. All of these may require diff technology
solutions.

##Firewalls

Just saying that a firewall is in place, though, doesn't really explain what is happening because there are several types of firewalls running up the network
stack.

###Packet Filters

At a basic level, a firewall is a packet filter. Lots of devices offer the capability to filter packets, which is sometimes accomplished with access control lists.
Routers and switches will often have the ability to perform packet filtering. This packet filtering is sometimes implemented in an access control list. Packet filters
make determinations about the disposition of packets based on protocol, ports and addresses. Ports and addresses can be filtered based on both source and destination.

Packets can be dropped, meaning they don't get forwarded on to the destination, and there is also no response message sent to the originating system. They can also
be rejected, meaning they won't be sent to the destination, but the rejecting device, if it is following protocol specifications, will send an ICMP error message
to the sender indicating that the destination is unreachable. This is not only the polite approach, since drops will incur retransmits; it's also generally considered
the correct approach from the protocol standpoint. However, when it comes to system security, dropping messages may just make more sense. If messages just get dropped,
it's unclear to the sending system what happened. The target system is essentially in a black hole.

Of course, packets can also be accepted. This can be done as a matter of rules, or it may be policy. Packet filters may have a policy that governs the behavior of
the filter. This means there is a blanket rule that applies to everything unless exceptions are applied. A default deny policy, the most secure way to implement a
packet filter, will drop everything that isn't explicitly allowed through. I may also have a default accept policy, which means everything is allowed through unless
something is explicitly blocked.

I may have run across packet filters if I run Linux systems. While the host based firewall included in most Linux distributions has other capabilities, it can also
function as a basic packet filter. I can set a policy on diff chains with the iptables firewall that is in the Linux kernel. As an example, the following lines
show running iptables to set a default deny policy on the INPUT, OUTPUT and FORWARD chains, which are collections of rules applied to specific message flows.

	[iptables] Policy Settings]
iptables -P INPUT DROP
iptables -P OUTPUT DROP
iptables -p FORWARD DROP

Packet filtering is basic in its functionality. While these packet filters can be good for inbound traffic or even for keeping internal users from accessing specific
ports or IP addresses, they are not good for more complex filtering, such as allowing inbound traffic that is a response to messages that originated on the inside
of the network. For this, I need to keep track of those outbound connections, so I need something more than just a packet filter.

###Stateful Filtering

A stateful firewall keeps track of the state of messages within the conversation btw client and server. This means the firewall has to have a state table, so it
knows about all of the traffic flows passing through it. In the TCP, it's theoretically easier since the flags tell the story when it comes to the state of
the traffic flow. A message that has just the SYN flag turned on is a NEW connection. It remains in this state until the three-way handshake has been completed.
At that point, the state of the flow becomes ESTABLISHED. In some cases, I may have message flows that are RELATED. As an example, the FTP will sometimes
originate connections from the inside to the outside, meaning from the server to the client. In this case, the server-to-client connection for transferring the
file is related to the control connection from the client to the server.

Even with TCP, the flags don't tell the whole story. After all, it would be easy enough to send messages with the correct flags set to get through a firewall
that was only looking at the flags to determine what the state of the communication is. The UDP has no state that is inherent to the protocol. This makes it
impossible to look at any flags or headers to infer state. Stateful firewalls don't just look at the flags or headers, however. They keep track of all the
communication streams so they aren't relying on the protocol. They watch messages coming in and going out and note them along with their directionality to
determine what the state is. This means the firewall knows which end is the client and which end is the server.

When I have a stateful firewall, I not only can make decisions based on the ports and addresses, I can also add in the state of a connection. For example,
I can see a pair of iptables rules in the following code listing that allow all connections that are NEW or ESTABLISHED into port 22, which is the Secure Shell
(SSH) port. Additionally, connections that are established are allowed out on interface eth0. With a default deny policy, new connections won't be allowed out
of the interface.

	[iptables State Rules]
iptables -A INPUT -i eth0 -p tcp --dport 22 -m state --state NEW ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
iptables -A OUTPUT -o eth0 -p tcp --sport 22 -m state --state ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT

This gets me a little further in my capabilities to make decisions about what packets to allow or deny into my networks. While it doesn't seem like a lot,
these capabilities provide a lot of potential for keeping bad people out.

###Deep Packet Inspection

One of the biggest issues when it comes to firewalls is that they allow known services through. A firewall will allow connections to a web server through.
This means attack traffic to the web server will just be let through the firewall. Attack traffic that uses the application against itself will set up
connections just like any other client. From the standpoint of the packet filters and stateful filtering, the messages will pass through. Because of that,
we need to go deeper. Just looking at the protocol headers is insufficient, because everything will look correct and legal in the headers. We need to
start looking at higher layers of the stack.

A deep packet inspection (DPI) firewall looks beyond the headers and into the payload of the packet. With this approach, it's easier to identify malware
and other inbound attacks. A DPI firewall would require signature that it should look for in the packet to determine whether something is going to be malicious
so it can block the traffic from coming into the network. To do this, the firewall has to parse the entire message before it can make any determinatons. This
means it has to have at least the entire packet, meaning any fragmentation at the IP layer has to arrive and be reassembled. In some cases, it may need the
entire stream, whether that's UDP or TCP. This certainly means a little latency on the arrival of messages.

Packet filters and stateful firewalls don't need to reassemble anything, assuming the entire header has arrived. Any message that doesn't have the entire set
of IP and TCP/UDP headers is likely a problem anyway, since that's well under 100 bytes. Fragmenting a message at under 100 bytes could be a result of malicious
traffic, trying to fool a firewall or other security solution. They belong together. Only looking at the headers is limiting, though, especially since so many
attacks today come in over the higher-layer protocols.

One consideration to keep in mind, though, is that encrypted traffic can't be inspected. The firewall won't have the key to decrypt the message to look at it.
Any man-in-the-middle approach to encryption on the part of the firewall violates the end-to-end expectations of most encryption solutions and users. The headers,
of course, aren't encrypted. If they were, no intermediate device would be able to determne where anything was going. This means packet filters and stateful
firewalls are not impacted by encryption. DPI firewalls, though, are. This means that with the move to encryption over all web-based connections, DPI
firewalls don't do a lot to protect the web server.

###Application Layer Firewalls

There are application layer firewalls in addition to the DPI firewalls. While these firewalls also inspect the packet, they commonly are specific to a particular
protocol. For example, in a voice over IP (VoIP) networks, a device called a session border controler (SBC) can be used. This is a device that understands the VoIP
protocols -- commonly either H.323 or the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). As such, it not only can make determinations about the validity of the messaging but
also can open up dynamic pinholes to allow the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) media messages through, since they would be over diff ports and protocols than
the signaling messages would be.

An SBC would be an example of an application layer firewall, since it has the capability of making decisions about allowing traffic through. It makes decisions
based on understanding the application layer protocol and common state flows of that protocol.

Another common application layer firewall would be a web application firewall (WAF). The WAF uses a set of rules to detect and block requests and responses. Given
the number of web based attacks, keeping up with these rules can be challenging. While there are several commercial WAFs, there is also ModSecurity, which is an
open source module that can be used with Apache web servers. The rules can get complicated, and I can see an example in the following code listing.

	[mod-security Rule]
		secRule RESPONSE_BODY "@rx (?i)(?:supplied argument is not a valid MySQL|Column count doesn't match value count at row|mysql_fetch_array\(\)|on
MySQL result index|You have an error in your SQL syntax;|You have an error in your SQL syntax near|MySQL server version for the right syntax to use|\[MySQL\]
[ODBC|Column count doesn't match|Table '[^']+' doesn't exist|SQL syntax.*MySQL|Warning.*mysql_.*|valid MySQL result|MySQLClient\.)"
\
		"capture,\
	       setvar:'tx.msg=%{rule.msg}',\

setvar:tx.outbound_anomaly_score=+%{tx.critical_anomaly_score},\

setvar"tx.sql_injection_score=+%{tx.critical_anomaly_score},\
								setvar:tx.anomaly_score=+%{tx.critical_anomaly_score}, setvar:tx.%{rule.id}-OWASP_CRS/LEAKAGE/ERRORS-
								%{matched_var_name}=%{tx.0}"

The rule I see looks in the response body for the message that is found after @rx. This indicates that what comes next is a regular expression. The regular
expression describes the message the rule is looking to match on. If the rules matches, the regular expression match will be placed into transaction variable
collection because of the capture action. There will also be several variables that get placed into the transaction variable collection.

In addition to capturing information, which can be logged and referred to later or be used for alerting, ModSecurity can block as an action. This will prevent
the message from going past the WAF. What this means is that the WAF sits in front of the web server that is being protected. Sometimes, a WAF like ModSecurity
is implemented on the edge of the network as reverse proxy, so clients send messages to the reverse proxy, which handles the message on behalf of the server,
parsing it for potential bad requests, before sending it on to the actual web server. Responses also pass through the reverse proxy.

These are just a couple of examples of application layer firewalls. They may also be called application layer gateways. Any device that can make decisions based
on what is happening in the application layer protocol and then have the ability to drop the message, regardless of the application layer protocol, could be
considered an application layer firewall.

###Unified Threat Management

Sometimes a firewall alone isn't enough. Even in the case of application layer firewalls, I still need to protect the users. Users are often the most vulnerable
point on my network, and they are regularly targets of social engineering and malware attacks. A unified threat management (UTM) device is one that consolidates
a lot of security functions into a single system that may be placed at a single point in the network. This UTM would replace the firewall, intrusion detection and
intrusion protection devices as well as offering antivirus protection.

There are downsides to this type of approach. I now have a single point in my network where all of my security is handled. If this device fails for whatever reason,
I have no backstops in place. If my firewall failed, for instance, I would still have intrusion detection systems to catch anything that got through, if that had
happened. With UTM, I have one place, and it needs to work all the time and be configured correctly all the time.

###Intrusion Detection Systems

There are two diff types of intrusion detection systems (IDSs) that I can find. The first is a host-based IDS. A host-based IDS watches activity on a local system,
such as changes to critical system files. It may also watch log files or audit other system behaviors. One of the challenges with a host-based IDS is that once an
attacker is in position to trigger a host-based IDS, they are on the system, which means they can become aware that the IDS is in place and make plans accordingly.

The second type is a network IDS. Where firewalls have the ability to block or allow packets in the network stream, a network IDS can take some of the same sorts
of rules and generate log messages. A rule for an intrusion detection system can generally be based on any layer in the network stack. As long as I can create
some sort of identification for the messages I want to log or alert on, I can write a rule for an IDS. As with the firewalls, there are a number of commercial
options. There are also some open source options, one of the biggest names being Snort, which is currently owned by Cisco, but free access to the program and
some community rules is still offered.

A network IDS watches all network traffic that passes by network interface. This means that placement is important. There may be diff approaches to placement,
depending on the IDS product being used. One of these approaches is to place the IDS connected in parallel rather than in series at the very perimeter of the
network so all network traffic coming can be observed. IDS can be behind the firewall but not in the traffic flow directly. Traffic gets shunted to the IDS so
it can detect without getting in the way or causing a network failure. Another approach is to place sensors in diff parts of the network so I don't have a single
device. This approach may be expecially useful if I'm trying to look at potential insider attacks.

It used to be the case, many years ago, that IDS devices had problems keeping up with all of the traffic coming through a network, since the IDS device had to look
at each packet and compare it against as many rules as were configured. This isn't the case any longer because processing power has increased considerably, as
has overall bus throughput in systems. Even so, using multiple sensors across diff parts of the network can allow for sharing the processing load.

I can take a look at Snort rules to see what an IDS can do and how it may work. Just as with WAF rules, it takes some time and effort to understand how to write
rules, especially in cases where what I'm trying to detect on is content in the packets. In the following code listing, I will see two Snort rules that demonstrate
some of what Snort can do.

	[Snort Rules]
alert tcp $EXTERNAL_NET any -> $SQL_SERVERS 7210 (msg:"SQL SAP MaxDB shell command injection attempt"; flow:to_server, established; content:"exec_sdbinfo";
fast_pattern:only; pcre:"/exec_sdbinfo\s+[\x26\x3b\x7c\x3e\x3c]/i"; metadata:policy balanced-ips drop, policy max-detect-ips drop, policy security-ips drop;
reference:bugtraq,27206; reference:cve,2008-0244; classtype:attempted-admin; sid:13356; rev:7;)
alert tcp $EXTERNAL_NET any -> $HOME_NET 21064
(msg:"SQL Ingres Database uuid_from_char buffer overflow attempt"; flow:to_server, established; content:"uuid_from_char"; fast_pattern:only;
pcre:"/uuid_from_char\s*?\(\s*?[\x22\x27][^\x22\x27]{37}/smi"; metadata:policy balanced-ips drop, policy max-detect-ips drop, policy security-ips drop;
reference:bugtraq,24585; reference:cve,2007-3338; reference:url,supportconnectw.ca.com/pubblic/ca_common_docs/ingresvuln_letter.asp;
reference:url,www.ngsoftware.com/advisories/high-risk-vulnerability-in-ingres-stack-overflow; classtype:attempted-admin; sid:12027; rev:11;)

Snort rules start with an action. I can alert, as is done in both of these rules, which generates an alert message to whatever is configured for output. In addition,
however, I can log, drop, reject and pass, along with some actions. Some of these capabilities take us beyond traditional IDS functionality, but they are actions that
Snort can take in rule configurations. After the action, I configure the details about the headers. This includes the protocol I want to alert on. In my case, I'm
alerting on a TCP message, so I need to specify not only a source and destination address but also a source and destination port. The -> indicates the direction of
the flow.

Inside the () are the details about the rule. First is the message to use in the log. After that, I will find details about the flow. Snort is aware of which side
is the client and which is the server, so I can indicate which side the message should come from. While I've specified source and destination ports, this is a little
more detailed. The important part comes next, where I specify what the packet should contain to match on this rule. I will also see metadata, such as reference info.
This reference info may include details about a vulnerability this is meant to alert on. Finally, rules will have a Snort identification number (SID). While this is
configurable, there are conventions about numbers that should be used for user defined rules. Values up to 999999 are reserved for the use of rules that come with the
Snort distro. I can also specify a revision number, so I can have some version control on the SIDs I use.

Commonly, I would use alert or log in the case of an IDS, since the intention of an IDS is just to detect events. The alert assumes that someone is payng attention
to what the IDS is emitting and taking actions based on the alert and a subsequent investigation. There are, though, cases where I may want the IDS itself to do
something with what if found. 
 
###Intrusion Prevention Systems

An IPS takes and IDS a step further. Snort has actions includind drop and reject. These are actions that are beyond the capability of Snort itself. Snort monitors
network traffic and parses through it to identify packets that contain possible malicious contents, as identified by the rules. To have Snort run as an IPS, it has
to be placed inline, meaning it has to be a device in the path of traffic into and out of the network. Any IPS would have to be similarly configured in order to have
the ability to block any network traffic.

With the IPS in the flow, it can act like a firewall, making decisions about whether to accept or reject packets as they enter the network. The difference btw an IPS
and a firewall is that the "firewall rules" on an IPS would be dynamic. Rather than having large blanket rules blocking IP adressess wholesale, the IPS would make
decisions based on the contents of packet. The rule would be in place for the duration of the packet passing through the IPS -- essentially a one-off. The rule
may just exist to handle that one packet, or it may be in use for a longer period, but the rules are dynamic and temporary by nature. Also while inline, either the
IPS can choose to drop the message, meaning just discard it, or it can reject it with an appropriate message. This may be an ICMP destination unreachable message,
for example.

Even with an IPS where potential attacks are blocked, the logs and alerts should be investigated. Not every message that matches an IDS/IPS rule will be a legitimate
attack. In several cases of running a basic Snort installation with the community rules, I have run across alerts indicating bad SIP messages, when in fact the traffic
was HTTP over port 80, not SIP. Rules are not infallible, so it is possible for rules to catch legimitate traffic, and if I'm running an IPS, I may end up blocking
messages from customers or partners.

One of the challenges of an IDS or IPS is the volume of logs they can create. This is a factor of the number of rules I have, how well they are written, and how much
traffic I get into my network, as well as the placement of my sensors. Alerting is a significant challenge, and it can require a lot of work to fine-tune rules so
my analysts, or whoever is looking at the alerts, don't become screen-blind, meaning they get so used to seeing the same alerts over and over that they end up missing
one that is legitimate --  a white rabbit in a field of white snow/noise. Fortunately, there are solutions that can help with that problem.

###Endpoint Detection and Response

While I may be familiar with anti-malware software, used to detect the existence of viruses and other malicious software on a system, I may be less familiar with this.
EDR is a class of software that can perform a range of fucntions that are useful to a security operations staff.There are several commercial offerings in the EDR space,
and each one of them may provide a diff set of functionalities, though there will be a core set of functions they all provide.

One functions they may provide is anti-malware. Not all EDR solutions will offer this sort of preventive control. An EDR that offers anti-malware may be focused not only
on the signatures that would be typical for anti-malware but also behavior-based detections. After all, the vendors of this EDR solutions are aware of the same TTPs that
MITRE publishes so they can look for the TTPs that would relate to how malware may expect to install and run. They may be able to prevent malware from executing, or at
least generate an alert to indicate suspicious behavior was found.

EDR solutions may also detect other malicious behavior, which may be done through investigating logs that are available on the system. However, the most common functions
EDR tools will perform is being able to remotely assess systems from a central console. Additionally, these tools can be used to pull back artifacts from the systems.
This may include such details as process listings, memory dumps, files or logs. Google Rapid Response (GRR) is an example of an EDR.

Having the ability to capture details quickly without having to go to the target system makes response a lot faster. However, attackers do know about these tools and
may simply opt not to runif the existence of the tools is detected. They may also go into more extreme versions of evasion to make it a lot harder for the EDR to locate
the attacker and their techniques. However, if I need to be able to capture a lot of details about a remote system for any sort of investigation, these tools are invaluable.

Another function EDR tools can often provide is isolation. If I happen to notice an attacker has gained access to a system, I want to keep them from being able to get to
other systems within the environment. I don't want them to know that I know that they are there, however. If they know I know they are there, they either may go into
hiding, remaining in the environment while staying away from my eyes until I stop prying, or may burn everything down just to make life harder for the business.

An EDR tool may be able to perform something called host isolation. While this may be able to be done within the network, especially if I have firewalls controls
within the network within the network segments, it can be more efficient to just use a software control on the local system where the attacker has been seen.
The attacker retains access to the system, but they unable to get out to any other system. This may be done while the complete scope of the investigation is being
completed -- trying to figure out everywhere the attacker is within the environment.

###Security Information and Management

A good practice from the standpoint of both system administration and security is system logging. Logs are helpful to diagnose problems in the system and network.
They can also help in an investigation of a potential issue. Forensic investigators and incident responders will find them invaluable. If I've ever had to troubleshoot
a system or application that has failed without having any logs to look at, I will understand the value of logs. However, turning up all logging to the maximum isn't
the answer either. Logs consume disk space, though disk space is generally inexpensive these days. They also consume processing power, and more logging can actually
make it harder to find problems because I'm having to wade through enormous volumes of text to find one entry that will help me. I won't always know the text to search
for after all.

This is where a good log management system can be helpful. In the case of security incidents, these log management systems can also include search and correlation
tools. While there are many log management solutions, many orgs are moving to something called security inforamtion and event management (SIEM). SIEM software,
however, is simply a log management solution. I don't just dump all my logs into it and move on. SIEM software is used to correlate and analyze security alerts.
It will also provide me with the ability to better visualize my data. See Elastci Stack (Elasticsearch, Logstash and kibana).

A SOC will often be built around monitoring systems, including a SIEM system that can be used to correlate data from a number of diff sources. The advantage to
using SIEM is being able to pull a lot of data together so I can get a broader picture of what is happening across the network. This will help me to see trends
and largers attacks. Seeing an attack in isolation may get me to focus on the one attack I'm looking at, rather than recognizing that there are several other systems
other systems that are also being attacked. A single system doesn't necessarily provide me with the entry point.

Having data points can help to ensure that the right controls are in place to protect info assets. Data is only a starting point, however. I still nedd to be able to
interpret it and understand what to do with what I have. A strategy is important. This can be policies and procedures as well as technology plan. I may also want to
have a philosophy about how I'm going to implement everything I have.

###Being Prepared

Technology is all well and good. However, technology in and on itself is insufficient to protect a network. It's been said that the only secure computer is one
that has had all of the cables cut and, ideally, has been filled with cement and dropped to the bottom of the ocean. If I want to do anything with a computer, I
am exposing myself to the potential for that computer to become infected or compromised. Security comes from planning and prepararation. To be prepared, I need
to make sure I have thought through the implications of my actions, as well as how I am implementing any solutions I have in place.

Implementing security solutions requires understanding where my resources are -- this is not only information assets. It's also my technology assets. Perhaps
most important, it's my human assets. Technology alone won't be sufficient. I can take care of technology aspects with a defense-in-depth approach to security
design and architecture. A defense-in-breadth approach, though, require humans.

As mentioned earlier, having logs is really important when it comes to responding to security events. While it's nice to have a SIEM solution, even if I have one,
I need data to feed to it. I can get that data by making sure I am logging on to my systems. Additionally, accounting information is useful so I have a trail of
activity to track behaviors.

###Defense in Depth

It's a layered approach to network design. Using a defense-in-depth approach, I would design a layered network with multiple security gateways to control access
btw layers. One of the objectives of a defense-in-depth approach is to delay the attacker or adversary. It's also to, ideally, create artifacts along the way.
When a defense-in-depth strategy is used, as an adversary moves through the layers of the network, they leave traces. These traces can be detected by automated
analysis tools or operations staff.

The first area of controls to consider is physical.

The second area of controls is technical. Firewalls, IDSs, SIEMs and othe security technology. It can be software or config controls like passwords policies,
requiring complex passwords, antivirus or other endpoint protection.

Finally, there are administrative controls. These are the policies, standards and procedures. This may include policies or practices like hiring standards,
background checks and data handling policies. These admnistrative controls set the tone for how the org is protected and they are essential.

###Defense in Breadth

It's all the surround that is missing from defense in depth. Defense in depth doesn't take into account all of the human factors. Defense in breadth is
meant to take a more holistic look at the organization from a risk perspective. The org is meant to evaluate risk and take a systemic look at how to mitigate
any risk, taking into account the threats that the org expects to be exposed to. To fully evaluate risk and take a comprehensive look at potential solutions,
an org needs to have data.

One way, perhaps, to think about it is that defense in depth is really about prevention. However, prevention isn't entirely realistic. This is especially true in
an era where the old technical attacks of exploiting vulnerabilities in listening services exposed to the outside world are no longer the vectors of choice.
Instead, going after the user is more productive, so social engineering attacks and a lot of malware are more common. As a result, the best approach to security
is not to focus primarily on prevention but instead assume that I will get breached at some point and prepare for response.

To be prepared for a response, I need a lot of detection and historical data. Additionally, I need an incident response team whose members know what their roles
are. I also need a lot of communication across diff teams. The members of the sec team are not always the best people to perform all the work in response events.
This means that breaking down some of the traditional silos is essential.

A growing trend in the IT space is the collaboration btw development teams and operations team, commonly referred to as DevOps. Companies that are even more
forward-thinking are also ensuring that security is merged in along the way. What I end up with is something that is often called DevSecOps. These approaches
focus not only on teamwork and the associated communication that is necessary but also on automation. Automating builds, testing and deployment takes a lot
of the human factor out, helping to avoid misconfig or other mistakes.

The ultimate goal is to better position to not only protect the org but also respond to attacks -- also, to respond to a breach with the goal of restoring
business operations as quicky as possible.

###Defensible Network Architecture

It focuses on building my network in a way that I can more easily monitor and control. Keep in mind that one of the technique an attacker will use is to move
laterally (from system to system) within a network environment.

Attackers don't generally have the big picture with regard to the entire enterprise network, unless they happen across a network a diagram. If I create a
a network that has firewalls at the entry/exit point points of the network, a common approach used to segment the network, I have the ability to monitor
all traffic going into and out of the network. I also have the ability to create a choke point, meaning if I suspect an attacker is in one network segment,
I can restrict all access to other network segments.

Having these types of controls of blocking and monitoring allows me to better keep track of and control over what an attacker is doing, if I catch them
late in the attack lifecycle and they have taken up residence to at least a small degree. I may not have blocked them from getting initial access, but I
should have the ability to keep an eye on them and restrict further access while I get the complete scope of their infiltration of my environment.

###Logging 

System logging, application logging, network equipment logging. The importance of having historical data can't be overstated.

Many systems, including Unix-like systems as well as network devices, will support the syslog protocol. This is a logging protocol that began as the
logging mechanism for the SMTP server sendmail. Syslog not only has an easy-to-understand syntax in the creation and reading for messages, it also can
be used for remote logging as well as local logging.

Because syslog can support remote logging, it can be used as a centralized log host. This fact is, perhaps, especially important when preparing for incident
response. A common approach to wiping my tracks is to wipe logs. Any attacker who gets access to a system may be able to wipe the local logs, but if they are
streaming off the system, they are retained for later use, unless the attacker can compromise the central log host.

I can see an example of syslog messages below. Each message starts with the date, followed by the originating hostname. After that is the process that created the log,
including the process identification number. Finally, the message that the process generated is shown.















































